The anatomy of a GraphQL request (#564)
the-guild-org/the-guild-website: pages/blog/the-anatomy-of-a-graphql-request.mdx

import withArticle from '../../ui/blog/article'

export const meta = {
  title: 'The Anatomy of a GraphQL Request',
  author: 'laurin',
  tags: ['graphql'],

>   date: '2022-01-30',

Author: We can change it, if we already want to publish something else next week.

  description: "Let's go back to the basics and break down a GraphQL request.",
  thumbnail: '/blog-assets/the-anatomy-of-a-graphql-request/thumbnail.png',
  image: '/blog-assets/the-anatomy-of-a-graphql-request/image.png'
}

export default withArticle({ ...meta })

On a high level GraphQL servers are quite easy to use. You pass it a GraphQL schema, start the server and that is it.
For many use-cases that is sufficient enough.

> But let's dive deeper, under the hood and learn what is exactly happening under the hood and why it is useful to hook into each of the phases of an GraphQL request!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By diving into each phase of a GraphQL request, we will see how to implement advanced GraphQL server's capabilities such as caching, deferred, and streamed queries.
```

> While GraphQL can be done over almost any protocol, this article focuses on the most commonly used protocol [GraphQL over HTTP](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http). However, most knowledge can be transfered to other protocols such as GraphQL over WebSockets or other more exotic ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: While GraphQL can be done over almost any protocol, this article focuses on the most commonly used protocol [GraphQL over HTTP](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http). However, most knowledge can be transferred to other protocols such as GraphQL over WebSockets or other more exotic ones.
```

![The Phases of an GraphQL Request](/blog-assets/the-anatomy-of-a-graphql-request/phases-breakdown.png)

## HTTP Parsing and Normalization

> Clients send HTTP requests to the server with a payload that contains an operation document string (query, mutation or subscription) and optionally some variables and the operation name from the document that shall be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients send HTTP requests to the server with a payload that contains an operation document string (query, mutation, or subscription), optionally some variables, and the operation name from the document that shall be executed.
```

> Generally it is a JSON object for most requests that are executed via the POST http method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the requests are executed via the POST HTTP method, the body will be a JSON object:
```

**Example JSON POST Body**

```json
{
  "query": "query UserById($id: ID!) { user(id: $id) { id name } }",
  "variables": { "id": "10" },
  "operationName": "UserById"
}
```

However, when using the GET HTTP method (e.g. for query operations) those parameters can also be provided as a query search string. The values are then URL-encoded.

**Example GET URL**

```
http://localhost:8080/graphql?query=query%20UserById%28%24id%3A%20ID%21%29%20%7B%20user%28id%3A%20%24id%29%20%7B%20id%20name%20%7D%20%7D&variables=%7B%20%22id%22%3A%20%2210%22%20%7DoperationName=UserById
```

> The GraphQL HTTP servers first task is to parse and normalize the body or query string and furthermore determine the protocol that shall be used for sending the response. Currently the protocols can be `application/graphql+json` (or `application/json` for legacy clients) for a single result that yields from the execution phase, `multipart/mixed` for incremental delivery (when using `@defer` and `@stream` directives). Not officially in the specification, but also used is `text/event-stream` for event streams (e.g. when executing subscription or live query operations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GraphQL HTTP server's first task is to parse and normalize the body or query string and furthermore determine the protocol that shall be used for sending the response. The protocols can be:
- `application/graphql+json` (or `application/json` for legacy clients) for a single result that yields from the execution phase
- `multipart/mixed` for incremental delivery (when using `@defer` and `@stream` directives). 

Not officially in the specification, but also used is `text/event-stream` for event streams (e.g. when executing subscription or live query operations).
```

## GraphQL parse

> After parsing and normalizing the request the server will pass on the GraphQL parameters onto the GraphQL engine which will first parse the GraphQL operation document (which can contain any number of query, mutation or subscription operations and fragment definitions).
> 
> If there is any typo or syntax error this phase will yield GraphQLErrors for each of those issues and pass them back to the server layer, so it can send those back to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After parsing and normalizing the request, the server will pass on the GraphQL parameters onto the GraphQL engine that will parse the GraphQL operation document (which can contain any number of query, mutation, or subscription operations and fragment definitions).

If there is any typo or syntax error, this phase will yield GraphQLErrors for each of those issues and pass them back to the server layer to send those back to the client.
```

> For the following invalid GraphQL operation (`)` missing after `$id`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the following invalid GraphQL operation (`)` missing after `$id` at line 2):
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```gql

Author: I omitted it here because it is an invalid operation

query UserById($id: ID!) {
  user(id: $id {
    id
    name
  }
}
```

The error will look similar to this:

```json
{
  "message": "Syntax Error: Expected Name, found {",
  "locations": [
    {
      "line": 2,
      "column": 16
    }
  ]
}
```

> As you can, see the error messages are unfortunately not always straight-forward and helpful. The location can, however, help you tracking down the syntax error!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, the error messages are unfortunately not always straightforward and helpful. The location can, however, help you track down the syntax error!
```

      "selectionSet": {
        "kind": "SelectionSet",
        "selections": [
          {
            "kind": "Field",
            "name": {
              "kind": "Name",
              "value": "user"
            },
            "arguments": [
              {
                "kind": "Argument",
                "name": {
                  "kind": "Name",
                  "value": "id"
                },
                "value": {
                  "kind": "Variable",
                  "name": {
                    "kind": "Name",
                    "value": "id"
                  }
                }
              }
            ],
            "selectionSet": {
              "kind": "SelectionSet",
              "selections": [
                {
                  "kind": "Field",
                  "name": {
                    "kind": "Name",
                    "value": "id"
                  }
                },
                {
                  "kind": "Field",
                  "name": {
                    "kind": "Name",
                    "value": "name"
                  }
                }
              ]
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> This procedure is performed by the `parse` function that is exported from `graphql-js`. Other languages that are orientate themselves on the `graphql-js` reference implementation have a corresponding counterpart.

Reviewer: > Other languages that are orientate themselves on the `graphql-js` reference implementation have a corresponding counterpart.

I am not sure what you meant here 🤔 
Do you mean that other language-based GraphQL implementations (ex: Ruby) do follow the GraphQL specification?

Author: I meant that other languages have also a Parser implementation and AST structure for implementing this. However, when u use for example ruby or GraphQL dot net it won't be a JSON object, only when serialized - does that make sense? Do you have an alternative formulation for this?

## GraphQL validate

> In the validation phase the parsed document is validated against our GraphQL schema, in order to ensure all selected fields in the operation are actually available and valid. The previously parsed AST makes it easier for the validation rules to have a common interface of traversing the document.
> Furthermore, other validation rules, that ensure that the document follows the GraphQL specification are checked. E.g. whether variables referenced in the document are declared in the operation definition and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the validation phase, the parsed document is validated against our GraphQL schema to ensure all selected fields in the operation are available and valid. The previously parsed AST makes it easier for the validation rules to have a common interface of traversing the document.
Furthermore, other validation rules that ensure that the document follows the GraphQL specification are checked, E.g. whether variables referenced in the document are declared in the operation definition.
```

```json
[
  {
    "message": "Variable \"$id\" is not defined by operation \"UserById\".",
    "locations": [
      {
        "line": 2,
        "column": 12
      },
      {
        "line": 1,
        "column": 1
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

In case any error is raised the errors are forwarded to the HTTP layer which takes care of sending them back to the client over the determined protocol. Otherwise, if no errors are raised the `execution` phase will be performed next.

This procedure is performed by the `validate` function that is exported from `graphql-js`. Other languages that are orientate themselves on the `graphql-js` reference implementation have a corresponding counterpart.

## GraphQL execute

In the execution phase we are actually resolving the data requested by the client using the parsed and validated GraphQL operation document AST and our GraphQL schema, which contains the resolvers that specify from where the data the client requests is retrieved.

Previously, the HTTP request has been parsed and normalized, which yielded the following additional (but optional) values: `variables` and `operationName`.

> If the GraphQL document that will be used for execution included more than one executable mutation, query or subscription operation the `operationName` is determined to identify the document that shall be used.
> In case the determined executable operation has any variable definitions, those are asserted against the `variables` values parsed from the HTTP request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the GraphQL document used for execution included more than one executable mutation, query or subscription operation, the `operationName` is determined to identify the document that shall be used.
If the determined executable operation has any variable definitions, those are asserted against the `variables` values parsed from the HTTP request.
```

**Example error for anonymous document alongside named document**

```graphql
query UserById($id: ID!) {
  user(id: $id) {
    id
    name
  }
}
query {
  __typename
}
```

```json
{
  "errors": [
    {
      "message": "This anonymous operation must be the only defined operation.",
      "locations": [
        {
          "line": 7,
          "column": 1
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

Such an error will again be forwarded to the client by the HTTP layer.

Otherwise, if no error occurs, the field values will be resolved with all the parsed and provided parameters. The phase yields a single or stream of GraphQL execution results.

```json
{
  "data": {
    "user": {
      "id": "10",
      "name": "Laurin"
    }
  }
}
```

The HTTP layer forwards those to the client that initiated the request.

This procedure is performed by the `execute` and `subscribe` functions that are exported from `graphql-js`. Other languages that are orientate themselves on the `graphql-js` reference implementation have a corresponding counterpart.

> # Why use GraphQL Helix?

Reviewer: Arriving here, we don't know what is GraphQL Helix, and it is not explained or showcased below.

Maybe we could add a small intro to it?

Author: I removed this section. Let's not mention helix at all and instead focus on what envelop can do today and why yoga will be important for hooking into the HTTP phases in addition to the envelop phases.

Implementing the logic for parsing and normalizing the HTTP request is time consuming and an error prone process. By leveraging a well maintained and tested library that follows the GraphQL over HTTP specification we can reduce the time required for building a GraphQL HTTP server. Furthermore, it allows us to customize and replace the functions used for doing the `parse`, `validate` and `execute`/`subscribe` phases. It is a light-weight wrapper around `graphql-js` with maximum flexibility.

# Why do we want to override different phases?

> ## Parsing with `parse`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overriding `parse`
```

### Add Caching

Parsing a GraphQL document string comes with overhead. We could cache frequently sent document strings and serve the document from the cache instead of parsing it every single time.

### Test new Functionality

The GraphQL Type system defines the capabilities of the GraphQL service.
This phase can be used to add new capabilities to the type system that may not yet be supported by GraphQL specification.

> ## Validating with `validate`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overriding `validate`
```

### Add caching

Similar to parsing, validating a GraphQL document AST comes with an overhead. We could cache recurring document ASTs and server the validation result from the cache instead of validating it every single time.

### Add custom rules

You might wanna restrict what kind of operations are allowed to be executed. E.g. If we we only want to allow `query` operations, we can provide a custom validation rule that yields errors as soon as a `mutation` or `subscription` operation is encountered.

> ## Executing/Subscribing with `execute` and `subscribe`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overriding `execute` or `subscribe`
```

### Add caching

We can serve frequently executed GraphQL operation results from a cache instead of calling all our resolvers and fetching from a remote database/server every time.

### Add tracing information

We can collect statistics by measuring how long it takes to resolve each field in our documents selection set and narrow down bottle-necks.

### Mask and report errors

We wanna make sure the errors occurring during the execution do not contain sensitive information and are properly reported, so they do not go unnoticed and are properly reported.

### Add new functionality

We could customize the algorithm that is used by `graphql-js` in order to add new features or make it more performant e.g. by using [graphql-executor](https://www.npmjs.com/package/graphql-executor).

# Why use Envelop?

While making our GraphQL servers production ready and working with our clients we discovered that we were writing the same custom code over and over again.

> Envelop provides us a user friendly way of hooking into the before and after phases of `parse`, `validate`, `execute` and `subscribe`.

Reviewer: Same, a code example would be nice here to illustrate what is Envelop.

Author: I added one :)
